README.md, before:

# Retail ETL

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.com/PHMark/gs-news-app.svg?branch=main)](https://travis-ci.com/1byte-yoda/gs-news-app)

<!-- PROJECT LOGO -->

<!-- TABLE OF CONTENTS -->
## Table of Contents

* [About the Project](#about-the-project)
  * [Technology Stack Used](#technology-stack-used)
* [Getting Started](#getting-started)
  * [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
  * [Installation](#installation)
* [Common Errors](#common-errors)
* [Test Answers](https://github.com/1byte-yoda/dataengineer-test/blob/master/ANSWERS.md)


<!-- ABOUT THE PROJECT -->
### About The Project
This Batch ETL pipeline aims to parse semi-structured data like .tbl files,
stage it to a MySQL database, and then load it to a Star Schema
which resides on a PostgreSQL database.

#### General Architecture
![General Architecture](docs/images/general-architecture.png)

#### DAG Representation
![DAG Representation](docs/images/dag.png)


#### Technology Stack Used

* [Python 3](https://www.python.org/)
* [Airflow](https://www.airflow.org/)
* [Docker](https://www.docker.com/)
* [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/)
* [MySQL](https://www.mysql.com/)


#### Network Configurations Used
* Airflow: running on `localhost` at port `8282` 
* PostgreSQL: running on `localhost` at port `5432`
* MySQL: running on `locahost` at port `3306`


## Getting Started

### Prerequisites
For an easy setup, the installation of this project only requires docker and docker-compose which can be 
downloaded from the following links:
* [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)
* [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/)

Although, for development environment, like running tests & stuff, you will need to install
Python3 and the pacakges inside the `requirements-dev.txt` file.

Just take note that this project was tested and developed using Python 3.9.1, please check if you have the 
right version installed.
```
$ python --version
Python 3.9.1
```

### Installation
Once you have the requirements above, you can clone and spin up the project with ease.
1. Clone the repo
```sh
$ git clone https://github.com/1byte-yoda/dataengineer-test
````

2. This step is crucial, go to the project's root directory and follow the instructions inside the data_gen.
   txt file.

3. Make sure you've done the previous step, if so, you can spin up the docker containers with the 
   following command.
   
```
$ docker-compose up --build
```

4. This step is optional, and is required for development setup.
```
$ pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
```

5. Accessing the Airflow Web UI.
  * Airflow was set up to run at http://localhost:8282, kindly check this link, airflow must be up and 
    running. You'll be prompted to log-in.
    * Default credentials for airflow:
      * `username: airflow`
      * `password: airflow`
    * Although these information can be modified inside .env file.
  
#### Airflow's Login Page
![Login Page](docs/images/airflow-homepage.png)

6. This additional step was needed before you can run the project,
    * Add the connection details / credentials for PostgreSQL and MySQL databases.
    * Link to connection setup page http://localhost:8282/connection/list/, go to this link.
    * On the top-left area of the UI, you'll find a + (plus sign), click it to add services / configurations.

#### Airflow's Connection List Page
![Connection List](docs/images/airflow-connection-list.png)

#### MySQL Configuration
![MySQL Configuration](docs/images/airflow-mysql-config.png)

#### Postgres Configuration
![Postgres Configuration](docs/images/airflow-postgres-config.png)

#### Important
Please use "*password*" as your password for Both MySQL and Postgres configs. 

### Running Useful Commands for Development
Running the test suites:
```
# NOTE: This will download docker containers for Postgres and MySQL testing db.
#  and might take some time to finish.
#
$ make test
```

Formatting the whole code base following the `black` code style:
```
$ make black
```

Checking for lints / un-obvious code mistakes:
```
$ make lint
```

Checking the test coverage of the project.
```
# Prints the coverage output in the CLI.
$ make cov_report

# Saves the coverage output in a readable, HTML format.
$ make cov_report html 
```

Checking for Security Issues.
```
$ make scan_security 
```

For CI/CD Setup, I also created a checklist which 
was a series of steps/checks that can raise failures 
before we can deploy the project.
```
$ make checklist
```

#### TODO:
* Add Travis CI

#### Dev Notes:
* Each services have their own folders, you can configure your dev environment
  there as needed.
* You can change the logging level by modifying the AIRFLOW__CORE__LOGGING_LEVEL variable
in the docker-compose.yml / .env file


### Common Errors
* Volume data was not found by docker-compose
    * Make sure you already ran the data_gen.txt command.
    * If that's not the case, run docker system prune -a to clean up docker images, then build the 
      containers again
* pytest throws docker.errors.APIError
    * This is due to unstable network connection with the docker server,
      try running the test again.
    * Make sure airflow and other dependent services are down by running:
    `docker-compose down`, then run the test again

Commit message:

Added the OLTP schema diagram for completeness

README.md, after:

# Retail ETL

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.com/PHMark/gs-news-app.svg?branch=main)](https://travis-ci.com/1byte-yoda/gs-news-app)

<!-- PROJECT LOGO -->

<!-- TABLE OF CONTENTS -->
## Table of Contents

* [About the Project](#about-the-project)
  * [Technology Stack Used](#technology-stack-used)
* [Business Requirements](https://github.com/1byte-yoda/dataengineer-test/blob/master/business_requirements.md)
* [Getting Started](#getting-started)
  * [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
  * [Installation](#installation)
* [Common Errors](#common-errors)



<!-- ABOUT THE PROJECT -->
### About The Project
This batch pipeline aims to serve Retail Analytics Dashboard using semi-structured data (.tbl files)
which was generated using [data_gen.txt](https://github.com/1byte-yoda/dataengineer-test/blob/master/data_gen.txt)

#### Pipeline Flow
1. Data was generated using [data_gen.txt](https://github.com/1byte-yoda/dataengineer-test/blob/master/data_gen.txt),
but in a real scenario it may come from different data sources ie. REST API, I used this approach just to
simulate the incoming data.
2. Data will then be copied to a MySQL database.
Really, depending on the data user of this pipeline, but the main idea is to have the data staged at its
raw form. For simplicity I used MySQL database, which can be also a leverage if the team are more of SQL 
peeps. But we can also leverage Distributed File Storages like Azure Blob or AWS S3.
3. A SQL Query will then run on top of the raw data from the MySQL database to transform it in such a way 
   that it can be digested by the data warehouse (dimensional modeling).
4. After the data has arrived the Data Warehouse, we can now create analytical queries
to deliver insights to our data users.


#### General Architecture
![General Architecture](docs/images/general-architecture.png)

#### DAG Representation
![DAG Representation](docs/images/dag.png)


#### Technology Stack Used

* [Python 3](https://www.python.org/)
* [Airflow](https://www.airflow.org/)
* [Docker](https://www.docker.com/)
* [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/)
* [MySQL](https://www.mysql.com/)


#### Network Configurations Used
* Airflow: running on `localhost` at port `8282` 
* PostgreSQL: running on `localhost` at port `5432`
* MySQL: running on `locahost` at port `3306`


## Getting Started

### Prerequisites
For an easy setup, the installation of this project only requires docker and docker-compose which can be 
downloaded from the following links:
* [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)
* [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/)

Although, for development environment, like running tests & stuff, you will need to install
Python3 and the pacakges inside the `requirements-dev.txt` file.

Just take note that this project was tested and developed using Python 3.9.1, please check if you have the 
right version installed.
```
$ python --version
Python 3.9.1
```

### Installation
Once you have the requirements above, you can clone and spin up the project with ease.
1. Clone the repo
```sh
$ git clone https://github.com/1byte-yoda/dataengineer-test
````

2. This step is crucial, go to the project's root directory and follow the instructions inside the data_gen.
   txt file.

3. Make sure you've done the previous step, if so, you can spin up the docker containers with the 
   following command.
   
```
$ docker-compose up --build
```

4. This step is optional, and is required for development setup.
```
$ pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
```

5. Accessing the Airflow Web UI.
  * Airflow was set up to run at http://localhost:8282, kindly check this link, airflow must be up and 
    running. You'll be prompted to log-in.
    * Default credentials for airflow:
      * `username: airflow`
      * `password: airflow`
    * Although these information can be modified inside .env file.
  
#### Airflow's Login Page
![Login Page](docs/images/airflow-homepage.png)

6. This additional step was needed before you can run the project,
    * Add the connection details / credentials for PostgreSQL and MySQL databases.
    * Link to connection setup page http://localhost:8282/connection/list/, go to this link.
    * On the top-left area of the UI, you'll find a + (plus sign), click it to add services / configurations.

#### Airflow's Connection List Page
![Connection List](docs/images/airflow-connection-list.png)

#### MySQL Configuration
![MySQL Configuration](docs/images/airflow-mysql-config.png)

#### Postgres Configuration
![Postgres Configuration](docs/images/airflow-postgres-config.png)

#### Important
Please use "*password*" as your password for Both MySQL and Postgres configs. 

### Running Useful Commands for Development
Running the test suites:
```
# NOTE: This will download docker containers for Postgres and MySQL testing db.
#  and might take some time to finish.
#
$ make test
```

Formatting the whole code base following the `black` code style:
```
$ make black
```

Checking for lints / un-obvious code mistakes:
```
$ make lint
```

Checking the test coverage of the project.
```
# Prints the coverage output in the CLI.
$ make cov_report

# Saves the coverage output in a readable, HTML format.
$ make cov_report html 
```

Checking for Security Issues.
```
$ make scan_security 
```

For CI/CD Setup, I also created a checklist which 
was a series of steps/checks that can raise failures 
before we can deploy the project.
```
$ make checklist
```

#### TODO:
* Add Travis CI

#### Dev Notes:
* Each services have their own folders, you can configure your dev environment
  there as needed.
* You can change the logging level by modifying the AIRFLOW__CORE__LOGGING_LEVEL variable
in the docker-compose.yml / .env file


### Common Errors
* Volume data was not found by docker-compose
    * Make sure you already ran the data_gen.txt command.
    * If that's not the case, run docker system prune -a to clean up docker images, then build the 
      containers again
* pytest throws docker.errors.APIError
    * This is due to unstable network connection with the docker server,
      try running the test again.
    * Make sure airflow and other dependent services are down by running:
    `docker-compose down`, then run the test again
